Title: ASCII Art
Date: 2006-06-01 13:39
Modified: 2007-04-09 22:34
Author: Wm. Minchin
Tags: 100mb.nl, ASCII Art, Computer Art, Corrier, Emoticons, NoteMe.com, Series:Random Bits, Smilies
Slug: ascii-art

ASCII Art

Every so often you come across something really cool on the internet.
Today, that cool thing was a little program that generates ASCII art.

ASCII art is a rather old form of computer art. Before computers had
graphic displays, people would sometimes form little pictures by using
the different characters they could generate using the keyboard. I'm
sure you've seen "smilies", some of the simpler of this breed, that have
taken new life with instant messaging.

    :-)  Smilie
    ;-)  Wink
    :-(  Sad
    :-O  Surprise

Some of them can get more complicated, but the only one I remember off
the top of my head is a rose:

    @->--

As these "images" grow to more that one line, they rely on the
mono-spaced characteristic fonts used on these early computers. Luckily
for us, Corrier is still included as a basic font on almost every
computer.

       /\
      /  \
     /    \
    /------\
     |    |
     |    |

My attempt at a little house.

    +-----------------+
    |   Minchin Web   |
    +-----------------+

Or as a text decoration.

These decorations can go even a step further, using the relative amounts
of white space in the characters to form the image my shading, like you
would in a black and white image. I, unfortunately, am not that skilled
to produce an example, but these are the ones that I've always thought
are really cool. (I found some cool examples at
<a rhef="http://www.chris.com/ascii/">www.chirs.com/ascii</a>)

With modern computers, this is more or less a lost art, as now, it's so
easy to open up a graphics editor, and get something that looks exactly
like what you are trying to recreate. However, modern computer also
allow you to use colour as you create this ASCII creations. The coolest
one I've seen was the Linux penguin, created using a combination of
these two techniques. Check it out at
[www.100mb.nl](http://www.100mb.nl/). It's pretty big so you might have
to scroll back an forth to get the full effect.

The site that actually directed me there was another blog -
[www.noteme.com](http://www.noteme.com/). Øyvind Østlund ran an article
about this little program that I believe he had written that converts an
image to such ACSII art (Read the full article at
<http://www.noteme.com/comment.php?article=75>). Another very cool
picture was posted on an Italian blog at
[www.nikotra.it/test/img2html](http://www.nikotra.it/test/img2html/). If
I didn't know better, I might think it was actually a JPEG image.

If you manage to do something really cool like this, let me know.
