Title: Where's Willy
Date: 2007-03-22 19:30
Modified: 2007-04-09 15:47
Author: Wm. Minchin
Tags: CBC, Currency, Currency Tracking, Disease Spread, Epidemic, Science Blog, Series:Web Site-seeing, University of California, WheresGeorge.com, WheresWilly.com, WillyMap, Wilred Laurier
Slug: wheres-willy
Image: images/2007/Wheres_Willy_20s.jpg

A couple months ago I came across a bill marked with the website
[www.WheresWilly.com](http://www.whereswilly.com) so I looked into it. I
discovered the site was set up by the same guy that set up
[www.WheresGeorge.com](http://www.wheresgeorge.com). Where's George is
for American bills and Willy for Canadian.

The idea is you that you put a little note of the bills you have in your
wallet which includes the website address, put the serial number and
your postal code into the website, and then spend the bill like you
would normally. In time, someone will find your marked bill and return
to the site, input the serial number and their postal code and they can
find out where the bills been beforehand. The site does not require
registration, but if you do register (it uses your email as your ID),
you can log back in to see what has become of the bills you've entered,
and can configure it to send you an email when one of your bills shows
back up again. It's attracted enough note that CBC has a
[article](http://www.cbc.ca/news/background/counterfeit/wheres-willy.html)
on it.

I registered a couple months ago and have had a lot of fun. I do a lot
of spending using a credit card, and so don't go through as much cash as
I might otherwise, but I have managed to enter 70-odd bills and have had
perhaps ten reappear - some as close to home as on the street downtown,
and some in more excited locals like a casino 500+km away.

A useful utility I found is called
"[WillyMap](http://www3.telus.net/pseudochan/willymap.html)". You pull
the logs of your hits off the Where's Willy website and this utility
will generate a map of where your bills have turned up. Very cool!

Interestingly, a group of researchers from the University of California
were intrigued by the data available through Where's George, stating
that "Like viruses, money is transported by people from place to place"
and used it to develop a statistical model for how a epidemic might
travel through the United States. You can read a review on [Science
Blog](http://www.scienceblog.com/cms/web_game_provides_breakthrough_in_predicting_spread_of_epidemics_9874)
or if you have a copy of *Nature*, you can find the whole paper there.

In case you're wondering "George" refers to George Washington, who
appears on the American $1 bill and "Willy" refers to Wilfrid Laurier,
who appeared on the old Canadian $5 bills.

Check it out for yourself at
[www.WheresWilly.com](http://www.whereswilly.com) for my Canadian
readers and at [www.WheresGeorge.com](http://www.wheresgeorge.com) for
my American friends.

*[picutre](http://www.flickr.com/photos/impeccabletiming/242129064/) via by Snuggle Up & Read on Flickr*
