Title: The North American Union
Date: 2008-05-27 22:47
Author: Wm. Minchin
Tags: AllAboutCities.ca, Cities, History, New York, Series:Social Commentary, US Canada Relations
Slug: the-north-american-union

I came across a very interesting "social science fiction" essay today at
[All About Cities](http://allaboutcities.ca/), by Wendy Waters. [What
she
proposes](http://allaboutcities.ca/the-origins-of-the-federation-of-north-american-city-states/)
is that over the next 20 (!) or so years, American cities, burdened with
the efforts of keeping up their infrastructure and their level of
prosperity, will give up on trying to get the money needed out of the
federal government, and so, starting with New York, will declare
independence to take control of their financial house. Within a few
years, most major cities in the States will follow suit, and Americans
and their companies will flee Canada and these new city-states. Give it
a few more years, and these cities states will band together to form a
union *à la* European Union, with the end game of Canada and the United
States become a common political union, built from a basis of these
city-states. I was very impressed when I first read this, because it's
one of the few probable explanations of how Canada and the States could
merge into a single political entity. However, I can't help but poke a
few holes in the logic.

Take a read of what Wendy has written and then the rest of what I've
written will make a lot more sense - [**The origins of the Federation of
North American City
States**](http://allaboutcities.ca/the-origins-of-the-federation-of-north-american-city-states/).

## The Art of Timing

While to argue the timeline presented is to argue semantics, but let me
just comment that I think the outcome presented is only possible because
the timeframe is relatively tight (about 20 years).

## Why would they let New York go?

The start of this process is that New York declares independence,
effective 2018. It is suggested that the Union will let the city slip
away relatively quietly, as the United States would be mired in several
"oil wars". I question whether the American populace would let one of
their gems and a cradle of the American Union go so quietly. The last
time some tried to skip the Union, we got a 4 year Civil War. On the
flip side, would New Yorkers be willing to lose their identity as
Americans? It doesn't take long traveling through the States to realize
Americans are very proud of who they are and their history.

## Border Problems

With New York as a separate nation-state, somewhere there will be a line
-- a proverbial "line in the sand". Of particular concern is how "thick"
that border would become. The American philosophy seems to favour
security over trade, and a look to the Canadian-American border might
offer some insight: if the oil wars do continue for the next ten years,
expect long border waits, significant delays in shipping, seemingly
random refusals of entry, and the inability for New Yorkers to easily
live and work in the US or to live on one side and work on the other
side of the border. In effect, New York would find itself a chasm away
from the States, which could undermine the status of the ports and
airports of New York as gateways to the rest of the continent. How many
companies currently headquartered in NY would feel that they have no
option but to move their "American" base to the States to sidestep the
border mess?

## Show Me the Money!

The supposed impromptus for New York's split is the ability of the city
to lower its taxes and be more nimble in its government spending.
However, as New York steps off on its own, it would discover, like any
college kid moving out for the first time, that the 'real world' is
expensive. To maintain confidence in holding the UN headquarters and one
of the world's busiest ports, NY would need to make a strong showing of
either security or military force, including a naval presence (Good luck
trying to get a couple of warships out of the US Navy as you walk away
from the Union…). NY would also find itself responsible for the
'alphabet soup' of Federal agencies, including the
[CIA](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Central_Intelligence_Agency), the
[FBI](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Federal_Bureau_of_Investigation), the
[DEA](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Drug_Enforcement_Administration), the
[IRS](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Internal_Revenue_Service), the
[FCC](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Federal_Communications_Commission),
and [FAA](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Federal_Aviation_Administration),
[FEMA](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Federal_Emergency_Management_Agency),
[NOAA](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/National_Oceanic_and_Atmospheric_Administration),
the [SSA](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Social_Security_Administration),
and so on. Those agencies, although easy to label as "fat federal
bureaucracies," do benefit from [economies of
scale](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Economies_of_scale). In short, I
think New Yorkers would find themselves paying higher taxes as an
independent nation.

## Political Will

Here's the wildcard -- who will step up to the plate and make it all
happen? More demanding and more important than anything listed above
will be the political will to make it happen. Maybe that will will be
enveloped in a charismatic leader or a grassroots movement, but it is
the element that will make or break this political change, and also the
hardest to predict. With the right leader, NY would rise above the
struggles and would become a great nation-state; without that leader,
this whole discussion will remain academic.

## Conclusion

What I admire about Wendy is that she has been able to put together a
well-thought out and arguably plausible series of events, although I do
question many of her assumptions. Add to the mix that [Microsoft
recently announced plans for a Vancouver
campus]("http://news.cnet.com/Microsoft-sings-O-Canada-amid-immigration-challenges/2100-1014_3-6195049.html"),
in part to sidestep US immigration bottlenecks, and maybe the future is
with us already. In any case, it will be interesting how the needs of
cities are addressed in the coming years, and see what extremes cities
are forced to to maintain their prosperity.
