Title: Problems on the Interstate
Date: 2008-03-06 22:24
Modified: 2008-03-23 19:16
Author: Wm. Minchin
Tags: Interstate System, Series:Social Commentary, Society, Technology
Category: Social Commentary
Slug: problems-on-the-interstate

[![Exit off of Interstate H-1 in
Honolulu](http://3.bp.blogspot.com/_fWUoqQ2t4Js/R8yYcyoJslI/AAAAAAAAAeg/o8VaQhrmrzA/s400/Freeway+Signs.JPG)](http://3.bp.blogspot.com/_fWUoqQ2t4Js/R8yYcyoJslI/AAAAAAAAAeg/o8VaQhrmrzA/s1600-h/Freeway+Signs.JPG)

The Eisenhower Interstate program was brilliant for its day -- it created
a national system of freeways that crisscrossed the United States, and
has done much to provide the infrastructural backbone to today's booming
service industry. But the interstate has in turn caused other problems,
including suburban sprawl, funding and mode dependence, and a lack of
vision.

## Suburban Sprawl

One of the things the interstate created was easy access corridors into
cities. Developers realized they could build developments along the
interstate, where land was cheap to buy compared to being in town, and
bill it as a place where you could live out of the city yet still
commute to work, and you got your own house to boot. Does the American
dream not include owning your own castle, or at least a small house?
Thus, the flight to the suburbs began. Downtowns often suffered because
were under served by the new interstates, and one no longer had to be
downtown to be close to everything. Today, the problem faced by many
American cities is that of urban renewal -- how to breathe life into
their ignored and dilapidated cores.

## Funding Dependence

As many areas continued to develop, the interstate became the backbone
to a line of suburbs. In some areas, this is so prevalent that the whole
string of suburbs is known by the interstate number. Consider, for
example, the I-15 corridor in Utah that runs from Ogden, past Salt Lake
City, and south to Provo, sometimes referred to as the Wasatch Front.
Today, that 80 miles (130 km) of interstate is boarded on both sides by
suburbs, and is home to some 2 million people. When you have one road,
even if it is six or eight lanes wide, as the commuting road of choice
for that many people, you quickly run into capacity issues.

As bulk of funding for the interstate comes from the federal government,
there has been no necessity to develop a source of sustainable local
funding for interregional infrastructure in many places. Furthermore,
the suburbs surrounding many American cities have never developed a
sustainable regional development plan, with the money and political will
to give it teeth. Thus, the interstate becomes the only freeway around,
and the only regional high capacity road. The short commute that once
was a selling feature of the suburbs has become longer and longer, and
there are few ways to get around it.

## Mode Dependence

When the interstate system was developed in the late 1950's, it
represented a pronouncement of the bias that American cities have to
roads and personal automobiles. The "American love affair with the
automobile" is very real, and so this is understandable, but other modes
(methods) of transportation have suffered as a result. Railroads have
been resigned to second class, as more and more families could afford a
car, and more and more freight is moved by truck and passenger rail
almost entirely disappeared. In the industry, this has afforded
retailers greater control over their inventory, and has evolved into
"just-in-time" inventory systems, which have reduced costs for
businesses, as they no longer need a large regional warehouse. A high
precision form of this operating model a large part of the genius behind
Wal-Mart and their ability to offer such low prices.

However, as traffic volumes have grown, the interstates have become
increasing congested and the ability for trucks to move efficient
through many cities is gone. Railways are experiencing a renaissance in
some areas, aided by the introduction of intermodal freight containers,
but many spurs find themselves either abandoned or in sad repair. Public
transportation in many American cities is in sad shape, or simply
non-existent, with New York City being a notable exception. Most
European cities have impressive public transportation systems,
especially compared to their American counterparts, but one of the big
factors in favour of the Europeans is density. Most American suburbs
are, by definition, low-density housing. Low-density simply does not
support the critical mass needed to bring efficient public
transportation, and thus many American suburbs are lucky to get a city
bus route.

## A Vision; What Future?

> No problem can be solved from the same level of consciousness that
> created it.
>
> -- Albert Einstein

All is not doom and gloom; rather the first step in improving any system
is to recognize the problems in the current implementation. The
interstate is an important element of the economic backbone of the
United States of American, and will continue to be useful for many years
to come; I, for one, do not see Americans giving up their automobiles
any time soon. Yet there are problems before us, and they will not go
away on their own. What is required is someone to look beyond the
current mindset, and bring us a vision like the one that brought us the
interstate system some fifty years ago. Is commuter rail the answer?
High-density suburbs? Downtown residential? I think each of these, and
several others have a place, but none of them alone will prove a
solve-all solution. In short, we need a paradigm shift in how we view,
organize, fund, and run transportation in America. Transportation, and
cities in general, need to be built for **people**, and no longer for
cars. If someone can offer us such a vision, and the courage to act on
it, the generation yet to come of age will thank us from many, many
years in the future.
