content/20080416-dilbert-always-good-for-a-laugh.md, before:

Title: Dilbert: Always Good For a Laugh!
Date: 2008-04-16 13:34
Author: Wm. Minchin
Tags: Dilbert, Series:Web Site-seeing
Slug: dilbert-always-good-for-a-laugh

![Dilbert](http://1.bp.blogspot.com/_fWUoqQ2t4Js/SAZZCPI4a3I/AAAAAAAAAj4/yHCtNlo-EC8/s400/Dilbert.gif)

<!-- PELICAN_BEGIN_SUMMARY -->

Every so often I need a good laugh…and "Dilbert" by Scott Adams so often
fits the bill. For those of you out of the loop, Dilbert is the engineer
with the upturned tie who has a rather depressing social life and an
imbecile of a boss. The humour, I suppose, comes from the fact the
situations Dilbert has to deal with are far too common in cubicle-land.
The [official site](http://www.dilbert.com/) carries the last month of
cartoons ("Dilbert" is published daily), but that's not very useful to
pull up my all-time favourites. Yesterday I found the solution! This guy,
[S Anand](http://www.s-anand.net), has put together a collection of
Dilbert comics stretching back over six years! Check it out --> [Dilbert
Browser](http://www.s-anand.net/dilbert.html#today)

<!-- read more -->

A couple of my favourites too:

-   [Dilbert and his (broken)
    Xbox](http://www.s-anand.net/dilbert.html#20061031) - Oct. 31, 2006
-   [Career Day](http://www.s-anand.net/dilbert.html#20071118) - Nov.
    18, 2007

What is your favourite Dilbert cartoon?

Commit message:

Update links on Dilbert port

content/20080416-dilbert-always-good-for-a-laugh.md, after:

Title: Dilbert: Always Good For a Laugh!
Date: 2008-04-16 13:34
Modified: 2018-06-06 18:59
Author: Wm. Minchin
Tags: Dilbert, Series:Web Site-seeing
Slug: dilbert-always-good-for-a-laugh

![Dilbert]({filename}images/2008/dilbert.gif)

<!-- PELICAN_BEGIN_SUMMARY -->

Every so often I need a good laugh...and "Dilbert" by Scott Adams so often
fits the bill. For those of you out of the loop, Dilbert is the engineer
with the upturned tie who has a rather depressing social life and an
imbecile of a boss. The humour, I suppose, comes from the fact the
situations Dilbert has to deal with are far too common in cubicle-land.

<!-- read more -->

<del>The [official site](http://www.dilbert.com/) carries the last month of
cartoons ("Dilbert" is published daily), but that's not very useful to
pull up my all-time favourites. Yesterday I found the solution! This guy,
[S Anand](http://www.s-anand.net), has put together a collection of
Dilbert comics stretching back over six years! Check it out --> [Dilbert
Browser](http://www.s-anand.net/dilbert.html#today)</del>

**Update (June 2018):** The official site seems now to carry the full archive
(or at least these two I want to point to) and the un-official archive I was
pointing to no longer works. So time to update the links.

A couple of my favourites too:

-   [Dilbert and his (broken)
    Xbox](hhttp://dilbert.com/strip/2006-10-31) - Oct. 31, 2006
-   [Career Day](http://dilbert.com/strip/2007-11-18) - Nov.
    18, 2007

What is your favourite Dilbert cartoon?
