Title: Two Weeks In (Life in Québec)
Date: 2009-06-26 8:59
Author: Wm. Minchin
Tags: Quebec Trip 2009
Category: Quebec Trip 2009
Slug: two-weeks-in-life-in-quebec

*Monday, May 25, 2009*

So I realize according to my blog, I've been stuck in Dallas for the
last 2 weeks, but I'd like to invoke Jorn Barger's "Inverse Law of
Usenet Bandwidth;" that is "The more interesting your life becomes, the
less you post… and vice versa," and my life has been anything but
boring.

I pulled into Montréal Friday night, but about two hours later than I'd
hoped, and so I missed supper with the rest of the Group that had come
in on an afternoon flight. Getting into the room that had reserved for
me turned into a bit of an adventure in and of itself as I showed up
after the Front Desk has closed down of the night; but with a little bit
of luck and a little bit of wondering, I managed to find the security
guard that had my room key. Objective one completed: A place to sleep!

The rest of the weekend passed well -- a Saturday morning tour of
Montréal that for most of the Group turned out to be only breakfast,
Sunday was church at the Montréal YSA Branch, Monday was spent doing my
grad school application, and then Tuesday I took the GRE (Graduate
Record Exam, further to my application to grad school).

Tuesday night I left Montréal and Wednesday brought work -- the "real"
reason I'm out in Québec to begin with. One of the first challenges I
faced was finding a place to live. The program I'm out here with had
provided housing for the first week, and although I could stay put and
rent the room myself, the idea of spending the summer in a university
dorm had little appeal -- I'd already done two years in nicer dorms. What
I wanted was a little apartment, all mine, for the summer, as a break
from the worries and concerns of roommates. I started with the
classifieds and discovered that my task wasn't as simple as I had
assumed. First there was the language -- everything was in French -- and
the dozen or so words I had never had to use before: *duex et demi* (2
½) (two and a half rooms, approximately a small one bedroom apartment),
*semi-meublé* (semi-furnished, meaning a fridge and stove are provided),
*meublé* (furnished), *tout inclus* (literally "everything included,"
meaning they pay all the utilities), *rien inclus* (literally "nothing
included," meaning you have to pay the utilities), and so on. A bigger
problem than the French was the fact that everyone wanted me to sign up
to rent the place for a year, which poses a not-so-small problem when
you know you're leaving town in three months. Most landlords would flat
out reject moving me in for anything less than 12 months, although one
couple was "nice" enough to offer me a place, but on the condition that
I paid for at least 4 months. After two nights of looking, I managed to
find a nice one-bedroom apartment not far from the University with a
landlord that could fathom people moving in other times than July 1st
(the vast majority of leases in Québec seem to end and start on this
date).

Harder than apartment hunting was adjusting to the new lifestyle. I feel
very alone when I went through the first day here and at the end of it
realize that no one that I spoke to that day had ever met me two days
previously. Having my own place also meant I wasn't surrounded by the
constant flurry of activity that having five roommates brought. For me,
however, it's worked out well -- I've enjoyed having the peace and quiet
and I've meet (and been able to spend time with) some really cool people
from the Group, church, neighbors, and work.

The summer looks promising and I look forward to an amazing summer in
Québec!

---

<div class="text-center" markdown=1>
[To Quebec and Adventure!]({filename}20090424-to-quebec-and-adventure.md)  
Travel Days:
[1]({filename}20090501-day-1-edmonton-to-cardston-ab.md) ·
[2]({filename}20090503-day-2-cardston-ab-to-provo-ut.md) ·
[3]({filename}20090503-day-3-provo-ut.md) ·
[4]({filename}20090503-day-4-provo-ut-to-las-vegas-nv.md) ·
[5]({filename}20090505-day-5-las-vegas-nv-to-san-diego-ca.md) · 
[6]({filename}20090507-day-6-san-diego-ca.md) ·
[7]({filename}20090509-day-7-san-deigo-ca-to-mesa-az.md) ·
[8]({filename}20090510-day-8-mesa-az-to-el-paso-tx.md) ·
[9]({filename}20090510-day-9-el-paso-to-dallas-tx.md) ·
[10]({filename}20090527-day-10-dallas-tx-to-texarkana-ar.md) ·
[11]({filename}20090604-day-11-texarkana-ak-to-nashville-tn.md) ·
[12]({filename}20090605-day-12-nashville-tn-to-erie-pa.md) ·
[13]({filename}20090624-day-13-erie-pa-to-montreal-qc.md)  
Two Weeks In
</div>
