Title: AIG and the American Dream
Date: 2009-03-24 20:47
Modified: 2009-03-29 19:30
Author: Wm. Minchin
Tags: AIG, American Politics, Bailout, Series:Social Commentary, The American Dream, United States of America
Slug: aig-and-the-american-dream

Over the last week, the newswire has been flooded with stories about
AIG, first about the retention bonuses it had paid out, and then about
the angry backlash. Much has been written about what caused AIG to get
in this mess in the first place, and whether or not American taxpayers
should be bailing out the company, and so I won't rehash that, but why
is everyone so mad all of a sudden? I think the answer lies in the
American Dream.

America, as built by its immigrants, has always been as much an ideal as
it has been a place. The American Dream, put simply, is that one could
come to this land of opportunity and not hit a glass ceiling because of
social standing; that if one was willing to work hard, no dream was too
big. America was built on a solid work ethic! Contrast that with many
places where life operated according to the "Golden Rule" -- he who has
the gold, makes the rules.

The AIG bailout has brought a lot of scrutiny to the firm and everyone
connected to it. On some level, I think people are looking for a
scapegoat -- someone they can blame the whole mess on and be done with
it. While a solve-all scapegoat has yet to be decided on, the
interconnections between Wall Street firms have started to come to light
and it seems everyone is out to scratch each other's backs. Were the
CEO's really that clueless? Where were the company's internal controls?
Where were the regulators? How did they get away with this for almost 10
years? How does one company get to the point where it can bring down the
American economy? But for all the other questions, I think the question
that irks us the most is **How did AIG figure it could make money out of
nothing and make off like bandits? And why are everyday, hard working
Americans footing the bills of these slackers as this party comes
crashing down?!?**

Hindsight is 20/20, and so chances are that the regulations placed upon
the firms that rise up to replace AIG will be quite different from what
AIG faced. The real challenge, however, will be for the lawmakers in
Washington and elsewhere to convince the public that those who caused
this mess have not been given a free ride, that the economy is better
for bailing out AIG and the like, that the regulators and government
have the will to regulate these companies and protect the taxpayers; in
short, that the American dream lives on -- that he that works hard will
be rewarded for his efforts.
