Title: Disconneted?
Date: 2010-10-05
Modified: 2010-10-22 17:21
Author: Wm. Minchin
Tags: Series:Personal Bits
Slug: disconneted

(Written on Tuesday October 5, 2010, about a week before I had regular
internet again.)

So it's been two and a half weeks since I've had a steady internet
connection. In an objective reality, that shouldn't be that big of a
deal, but in today's fast-paced and always-on internet society, that
timeframe seems to lie somewhere between an eternity and an epoch. I've
been travelling (to Iceland and France) and so there's been a lot to do
and see, and so I haven't felt a particular lack. I haven't been
travelling alone either, so I haven't been lonely either.

To say I haven't have internet would be a lie as well, but my connection
has been limited to the free Wi-Fi at caf√©s and the likes of McDonalds,
which lends itself to quick email checks but not heavy surfing. But I've
started to settle in here in my new home and have started a new job.
Consequently, my list of 'needs' for the internet has started to grow: I
need a phone (or Google Voice or Skype) to find out what mail has come
back home, to phone my landlord and to phone my credit card; I
discovered that Google Image Search has turned into my clipart library;
I need Google to find a car rental place in town; I rely on the internet
to plan flights and hotels (I have two weeks vacation at the end of the
month); I didn't pack my French-English dictionary to save weight on the
premise that I would have access to something online; I miss having the
weather forecast; and let's not forget the hundreds of Megabytes of
software updates that are waiting for me when I finally reconnect.

In short, I have discovered that I use the internet for far more than
simple text-based communications.
