content/20100707-trb-transportation-research-board-bibliography-style-for-word-20072010.md, before:

Title: TRB (Transportation Research Board) Bibliography Style for Word 2007/2010
Date: 2010-07-07 11:34
Modified_1: 2012-06-28 7:17
Modified: 2016-08-08 21:25
Author: Wm. Minchin
Tags: BibWord, Microsoft Word, TRB, Word 2007
Alias: 2010/07/trb-transportation-research-board.html
Slug: trb-transportation-research-board-bibliography-style-for-word-2007-2010
summary: Introducing my version of the Transportation Research Board (TRB) reference style for use with the reference manager in Microsoft Word 2007 and 2010.

A wonderful citation
manager was introduced in Microsoft Word 2007 (found on the 'Reference'
tab, see below).

<div markdown=1 class="text-center">
![Reference in Word]({filename}/images/2010/References_in_Word.png)
</div>

It allows one to add
sources to a paper or report as it is being typed in a nearly automated
fashion and will then compile your reference list too. For me, it's been
a godsend; I like writing papers (well enough,
anyway) but get annoyed when 'minor' details, like what referencing
styles should
be used, start taking up major time. Great as it is, the one problem
that remained
was Word was limited to a few built-in styles; if the required style
wasn't on
the list, you were just out of luck. Well, it turns out that the Word
system is
actually quite extendable. The open source project
[BibWord](http://bibword.codeplex.com/) has
provided a framework to quickly add new styles and has generated a
number of new
ones. Based on that work, I here present my version of the TRB reference
style based on their [Guide for
Authors](http://onlinepubs.trb.org/onlinepubs/AM/InfoForAuthors.pdf) (PDF).

In-text references are numeric, based on reference order.

Repeated references reuse the original number.

> ... Different pedestrian behaviour is associated not only
> with different physical characteristics but also the differing purpose
> of
> pedestrians (*1, 2*). Studies have been
> carried out for crowds associated with transportation systems (*3, 4,
> 5*), sporting and
> general spectator occasions (*6*), holy sites (*7, 8*), political
> demonstrations (*9*),
> and fire escapes (*10*).

The bibliography output is as follows:

> 1. Polus, A., J.L.
> Schofer, and A. Ushpi. Pedestrian flow and level of service.
> <i>Journal of
> Transportation Engineering Proceedings, ASCE</i>, Vol. 109, 1983, pp.
> 46-57.
>
> 2. Toshiyuki, A.
> Prediction system of passenger flow, in *Engineering for Crowd
> Safety*,
> Smith, R.A., and J.F. Dickie. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 1993, pp. 249-258.
>
> 3. Smith, R.A., and J.F.
> Dickie. *Engineering for Crowd Safety*. Amsterdam, 1993.
>
> 4. Tanaka, T. A study for
> performance based design of means of escape in fire, in <i>Fire Safety
> Science
> -- Proceedings of the 3rd International Symposium</i>, Cox, G., and B.
> Langford.
> Amsterdam: Elsevier, 1991, pp. 729-738.
>
> 5. Wikipedia
> contributors. List of metro systems. *Wikipedia, The Free
> Encyclopedia*,
> June 17, 2010.
> <http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=List_of_metro_systems&oldid=368658114>.
> Accessed June 17, 2010.

To use this, download the file below and place it in the
`<winword.exe directory>\Bibliography\Style`
directory. Reopen Word and it should show up in the list of available
styles as "TRB [Minchin.ca]". This remains a work in progress, and so if
you find this
useful or find something that needs to be corrected, please contact me!

**Download**: [TRB Bibliography format for Word
2007/2010](http://minchin.ca/TRB_Minchin.ca.XSL) (right-click and select
"Save Link As...")

### Update (August 8, 2016)

It would appear that changes made in recent version of Word
(Word 2016, at least) have broken this. The format appears to be
similar, but I haven't (yet) had time to investigate what's changed.

So, for now, this sadly doesn't work with Word 2016.

Commit message:

[Post] TRB style updated for Word 2013/2016

content/20100707-trb-transportation-research-board-bibliography-style-for-word-20072010.md, after:

Title: TRB (Transportation Research Board) Bibliography Style for Word 2007/2010
Date: 2010-07-07 11:34
Modified_1: 2012-06-28 7:17
Modified_2: 2016-08-08 21:25
Modified: 2017-08-30 12:27
Author: Wm. Minchin
Tags: BibWord, Microsoft Word, TRB, Word 2007, releases
Alias: 2010/07/trb-transportation-research-board.html
Slug: trb-transportation-research-board-bibliography-style-for-word-2007-2010
summary: Introducing my version of the Transportation Research Board (TRB) reference style for use with the reference manager in Microsoft Word 2007 and 2010.

A wonderful citation
manager was introduced in Microsoft Word 2007 (found on the 'Reference'
tab, see below).

<div markdown=1 class="text-center">
![Reference in Word]({filename}/images/2010/References_in_Word.png)
</div>

It allows one to add
sources to a paper or report as it is being typed in a nearly automated
fashion and will then compile your reference list too. For me, it's been
a godsend; I like writing papers (well enough,
anyway) but get annoyed when 'minor' details, like what referencing
styles should
be used, start taking up major time. Great as it is, the one problem
that remained
was Word was limited to a few built-in styles; if the required style
wasn't on
the list, you were just out of luck. Well, it turns out that the Word
system is
actually quite extendable. The open source project
[BibWord](http://bibword.codeplex.com/) has
provided a framework to quickly add new styles and has generated a
number of new
ones. Based on that work, I here present my version of the TRB reference
style based on their [Guide for
Authors](http://onlinepubs.trb.org/onlinepubs/AM/InfoForAuthors.pdf) (PDF).

In-text references are numeric, based on reference order.

Repeated references reuse the original number.

> ... Different pedestrian behaviour is associated not only
> with different physical characteristics but also the differing purpose
> of
> pedestrians (*1, 2*). Studies have been
> carried out for crowds associated with transportation systems (*3, 4,
> 5*), sporting and
> general spectator occasions (*6*), holy sites (*7, 8*), political
> demonstrations (*9*),
> and fire escapes (*10*).

The bibliography output is as follows:

> 1. Polus, A., J.L.
> Schofer, and A. Ushpi. Pedestrian flow and level of service.
> <i>Journal of
> Transportation Engineering Proceedings, ASCE</i>, Vol. 109, 1983, pp.
> 46-57.
>
> 2. Toshiyuki, A.
> Prediction system of passenger flow, in *Engineering for Crowd
> Safety*,
> Smith, R.A., and J.F. Dickie. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 1993, pp. 249-258.
>
> 3. Smith, R.A., and J.F.
> Dickie. *Engineering for Crowd Safety*. Amsterdam, 1993.
>
> 4. Tanaka, T. A study for
> performance based design of means of escape in fire, in <i>Fire Safety
> Science
> -- Proceedings of the 3rd International Symposium</i>, Cox, G., and B.
> Langford.
> Amsterdam: Elsevier, 1991, pp. 729-738.
>
> 5. Wikipedia
> contributors. List of metro systems. *Wikipedia, The Free
> Encyclopedia*,
> June 17, 2010.
> <http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=List_of_metro_systems&oldid=368658114>.
> Accessed June 17, 2010.

To use this, download the file below and place it in the
`<winword.exe directory>\Bibliography\Style`
directory. Reopen Word and it should show up in the list of available
styles as "TRB [Minchin.ca]". This remains a work in progress, and so if
you find this
useful or find something that needs to be corrected, please contact me!

**Download**: [TRB Bibliography format for Word
2007/2010](http://minchin.ca/TRB_Minchin.ca.XSL) (right-click and select
"Save Link As...")

### Update (August 8, 2016)

It would appear that changes made in recent version of Word
(Word 2016, at least) have broken this. The format appears to be
similar, but I haven't (yet) had time to investigate what's changed.

So, for now, this sadly doesn't work with Word 2016.

### Update 2 (August 30, 2017)

[An updated version]({filename}20170830-trb-bibliography-style-for-word-updated.md)
has been provided by a blog reader, Maggie McNamara, that will work with Word
2013 and 2016! Thanks so much Maggie!
