Title: 3D Printing and Model Trains
Date: 2011-10-16 11:04
Author: Wm. Minchin
Tags: 3D Printing, Model Railway, Trains
Slug: 3d-printing-and-model-trains
Image: images/2011/IMG_6112-cropped.jpg

While in France, the combination of being somewhere near 'church mouse poor'
and living in a small (32 square metres / 350 sq ft) 1 bedroom apartment, I
looked for hobbies that took up little space and so settled on photography
(i.e. my [Project 365](http://blog.minchin.ca/search/label/Project%20365) here)
and dabbling in computer programming and to a lesser degree, artificial
intelligence (my [WmDOT](http://openttd-noai-wmdot.googlecode.com/) for
OpenTTD). It was quite enjoyable, but on my return to North America, I found
myself with a lot more space and more geographically stable. I wanted to make
things that were a little more physical and so with the encouragement of my
Honey, I started into Model Railroading, a childhood dream. One of my shocks
was the cost of models! A regular-ish building, measuring maybe 2x3x3 inches
would cost $60! There had to be a better way...

### Enter 3D Printing

Various technologies exist but the most popular, at least at the hobby level,
basically consists of a hot metal nozzle that melts a 'thread' of plastic and
then uses this melted plastic to paint, layer by layer, your desired object. A
kit for a printer like this can be had for \~$1300 which would be about the
same price as 20 buildings. And with a 3D printer, most of the time is spent
creating the computer model rather than in physical model building, so I
started wondering if I could sell some models and let someone else pay for my
printer and railway modelling...

<!-- Read More -->

### Literature Review

Good research starts with a review of those who have already worked on the
problem. My Google searches turned up a few sites of note.

The first is [a note from
2008](http://fabbaloo.com/blog/2008/7/16/tiny-3d-trains.html) talking about the
feasibility of using a 3D printer for model railroading. There were two
comments of interest: one, 3D printers are expensive, and two, the resolution
isn't there yet.

Next is a series of posts
([1](http://www.shapeways.com/blog/archives/126-Marleen-and-model-trains.html),
[2](http://www.shapeways.com/blog/archives/194-Shapeways-at-Rail-2009-The-long-train.html),
[3](http://fabbaloo.com/blog/2008/11/10/take-the-train-from-shapeways.html))
from about the New Years of 2009 when Shapeways, a 3D manufacturing company,
was invited to a model train conference in the Benelux (Belgium, Netherlands,
and Luxembourg). Not much was written as follow up, so I don't think the effort
worked as hoped.

Lastly, a came across [the blog of Robert
Bowdidge](http://makerbot216.blogspot.com/), who owns a 3D printer and a model
railway. His printer arrived in October of 2009 and he starts writing about
trying to create a custom building for his model railway two months later. His
concerns are again about resolution, but mostly in regards to getting [a flat
surface](http://makerbot216.blogspot.com/2010/01/theres-skeinforge-setting-for-that.html)
on the finished printed part and
[warping](http://makerbot216.blogspot.com/2009/12/i-trust-my-makerbot-making-model.html)
during cooling. With a little bit of tweaking, he decides that the result is
acceptable from a three feet back (which is where most of the observing of the
railway will be done anyway). He mentions some of the
[benefits](http://vasonabranch.blogspot.com/2010/01/printing-1920s-drive-in-market.html)
too: easy to create duplicate parts and easy to create parts with complex
geometries.

So the two issues that stand out are cost (of the printer) and resolution.

### Cost

Professional 3D printers don't come cheap. Searching online does not also show
prices, but from what I can gather, professional printer lines start at
$10-15,000 and can run to $60,000 or more and many also require maintenance
contracts. The hobby printers are cheaper - $800 for the parts of a RepRap or
$1300 for an unassembled Thing-O-Matic. Without someone else paying for it, I
don't think I can afford the professional level machines.

The other cost is that of materials. With many professional printers, they use
proprietary powders or epoxies. Prices are hard to pin down, but the few prices
I could find suggest $500-1000 per litre or more. In contrast, many of the
hobby printers use plastic that runs $50 per kilogram or a couple of cents per
cubic centimeter. Although not free, if it defendant within reach (like how we
don't think about paper in our inkjet printers today).

### Resolution

Resolution is a measure of how fine of thing can be printed and still be seen.
Ignoring the professional printers (already ruled out on the basis of cost),
the basic resolution of the hobby printers is based on the size of the nozzle.
For the Thing-O-Matic, I found a quote that the "stock 0.4mm nozzles allows
printing at a layer height of 0.32 and 0.27mm right out of the box"
([link](http://store.makerbot.com/stepstruder-mk7-complete.html)). That works
out to 3 or 4 layers per millimeter or 79 to 94 layers per inch. [The
record](http://wiki.makerbot.com/hall-of-fame-highest-resolution), according to
Makerbot, is 10 layers per millimeter, or about 250 layers per inch. That
record has stood for over a year, so I have hope that that could be improved by
myself or others soon.

My feeling is that if I could get 150 layers per inch (approximately 150 dpi or
dots per inch), I would have something workable. I remember when laser printers
used to give you 150 dpi and it seemed rough, but very workable. So I think
resolution is workable, although I will keep my eyes open for upgrades to that.

### Competition

Competition is good and bad. On the one hand, if there is some competition, it
means the idea isn't too crazy and someone else may have developed a market for
you; if there's too much competition, it's hard to stand out.

I found two competitors: Shapeways and MakeMyModel.
[Shapeways](http://www.shapeways.com/) is a print-on-demand service that allows
you to upload a model and then they print it and send it to you. So Shapeways
itself isn't a competitor, but their community might serve as competition (like
eBay). Their search brings up a couple of things
([1](http://www.shapeways.com/shops/zrailways),
[2](http://www.shapeways.com/shops/originaltrainandrail)),Â  but not a huge
selection and nothing in N scale (which is what I am modelling in). As a side,
depending on the margin I could generate using their service, this might work
as a drop-ship service for my own projects.

[MakeMyModel](http://www.makemymodel.com/) appears to have the same idea I do:
create railway models and then produce them on a 3D printer. I wasn't able to
figure out what kind of printer they use, but anything I added to my cart was
out of stock, so I'm not sure they're in business anymore.

### Conclusions

3D printing is still a developing technology and as such is not
"state-of-the-art" for model making. However, it is available at an accessible
price point and allows creation of models at home! As a plus, I don't think
it's unreasonable to turn it into a small side business. One of the big bonuses
of having the manufacturing in-house like this is that the inventory I need to
keep on hand is very minimal. And even if the business side fails, I still get
to use it to build my own railway!

### Other Reading

-   [Overview of 3D printing
    technologies](http://www.explainingthefuture.com/3dprinting.html)
-   [Some 3D printed model railroad
    parts](http://www.kitforums.com/viewtopic.php?f=6&t=5593&start=10)
-   [A tool to help with Makerbot
    configuration](http://www.makerbot.com/blog/2011/02/22/dead-simple-printer-calibration/)
