Title: Reflections on France, Three Months In
Date: 2011-01-27
Modified: 2011-02-16 4:03
Author: Wm. Minchin
Tags: France, Series:Personal Bits
Slug: reflections-on-france-three-months-in
Location: France

So it's been a little over four months since I arrived here in France.
I'm working, but only what I'd typically consider about 1/3 of "full
time" and so I've had lots of time to unwind and just enjoy myself.
Bring newly wed, I've also affectionately referee to this time as a
"honeymoon" too. That said, there's a few things that stand out in my
mind.

## HOME

*Home* is a funny word to start with, and adding more to the "fun," it
lacks a direct translation in French. If *home* is defined and "where
one belongs," which I have offered as a definition to many, the closest
term in French is probably *chez moi*, although it reflects the sense of
possession and thus refers to the things that belong to you. But setting
aside definitions, where should I call *home*? Should it refer to my
boyhood home, now on the other side of the world? Should it be the city
I lived in for five years while at University? Should it refer, in a
broader sense, to Canada? to North America in general? Sometimes I use
the term as a sort of metaphor for way of doing things different than
French, but I'm not always sure people catch the meaning when I used the
term this way. Perhaps *home* should refer to here in France. The
problem with that is this assignment has always been temporary in nature
and thus I have struggled to raise this place in France to the status of
*home*. Perhaps the best definition is "Home is where your heart is" and
so where my loved ones are, there is *my home*.

## CELLPHONES

Cellphones, or *portables* as the French call them, have become a
prominent facet of modern life. For much of my University career, my
cellphone was the best way to get a hold if me. But in moving to France
and looking for a simplified life, I decided to forgo a cellphone an
just use the landline included with my Internet package. A large part if
it was economics too - most of the plans were very limited in minutes,
maxing out at about 150 (compared to the 900 minute plan I had in the
States) and being here for only a half dozen months, I faced the option
of either buying an expensive phone up front and going with a month to
month plan or signing up for at least a year and facing a substantial
early termination fee when I check out in a couple of months. But in
truth, I call as often back to North America as to France and those
calls are free from my landline but never would be from a cellphone.

But cellphones are ubiquitous here in France in a way that I've never
seen in North America. By way of example, I can recount when I signed up
for the Internet: They asked me for cellphone number and when I told
them that I didn't have one, he looked a me like I was from Mars. Later
I was looking at my file, I realized that there was a cellphone number
on file and not one that I had provided. I wonder if their computer
system requires a cellphone number to submit the order...

## DRIVING

One of the last things I did before I left North America was sell my car
and one of my first adventures when I return will likely be buying a
car. That said, I enjoy not having to worry about a car here in France.
The whether has been decent and so walking hasn't been an issue. When I
want to got further than I care to walk, the city buses and the
intercity trains provide good service at a reasonable price. There have
been a couple of occasions when I've needed to rent a car and so I can
comment in the driving here.

Almost every car here is a manual and I was surprised at how easy it was
to pick up. The few places where I highly prefer an automatic, both
because of the smoother engagement of the drivetrain: backing up and
advancing repeatedly in tight circumstances (think parallel parking),
hill starts, and starting on snow.

One thing that France is perhaps famous for is its *round points* or
"roundabouts" as the British call them. On the surface, they seem like a
great way to eliminate stop signs and traffic lights, however the small
turning radius they require make them absolutely horrible in the snow
and ice. For that reason I hope they never catch on in Canada.

Sometimes it's the simple things that make a surprising amount of
difference; in thus case I'm thinking of running lights on trucks - the
little orange lights that run the length of the truck top and bottom. I
didn't think much of these little lights until I drove down a highway
here in France and kept being surprised to be next to a truck without
them. Without these little lights, it's lot harder to tell, from a
distance, whether the vehicle in front of you is a passenger car or semi
truck.

## WAYFINDING

Wayfinding, or the way to find the route from one city to another, is
fundamentally different between France and the United States, but the
methodology is perhaps a reflection of the transportation history of the
respective countries. In France, many of the transportation routes were
established by the Romans. The Romans were known for making their roads
straight lines between the given cities without much concern for the
terrain that might have made smaller people reconsider. The outgrowth of
this is that you generally navigate the highway system by knowing which
town is at the end of the road you want to travel and then travel across
the country by following a string a cities. In the United States, the
Interstate system, like the US highway system before it, was largely
laid out as a grid and then adjusted to ensure that the system hit the
points of interest, such as major cities and armed forces bases, that
the system was designed to serve. Thus, without obvious endpoints, the
American system was simply numbered and each road given a cardinal
direction (north, south, east or west). (The roads are still numbered in
France, just most people don't have any idea what the numbers are...) In
practice, this means that if you want get from Salt Lake City to Denver,
you take <u>I-15 South</u> and then <u>I-70 East</u>; while in France,
if you want to get from Paris to Nantes, you drive out of Paris
following the signs for <u>Le Mans</u>, then <u>Angers</u>, and finally
<u>Nantes</u>.

## LIVING NEXT TO THE OCEAN

There's a certain wonder to living next to the ocean like I am right
now. Perhaps I feel that way because I grew up so far from the sea. I've
heard of the moderating effect the ocean but it's another thing to watch
it in action. For example, earlier this winter I was visiting a town
about 60 km (35 miles) inland and it started snowing. By morning, they
had between 10 and 20 cm (2 to 4 inches) of snow, while I, on the coast,
had only a skiff of snow. Other times I've been spared snow while those
further in haven't. The conclusion I've drawn is I can see the wisdom in
living right in the edge of the ocean rather than several kilometres
back.

## FRENCH PAPERWORK

Much has been said about the mountain of paperwork the French system
required of you, and the reputation is well deserved. That said, the
French system is not particularly aggravating. In my experience, the
major difference between French and American paperwork is the response
when it doesn't work the way it's supposed to: in America, when you the
guy behind the desk them you don't have the paper they want, they tell
you to 'take a hike;' in France, they sort of knowingly moan and roll
their eyes and regularly you can argue your way out of needing the paper
in question if you know the rules and have everything else they want.
And French paperwork seems mostly involved with getting settled, and so
once I sorted everything out in the first couple of months, it's
*mostly* quieted down. That said, I'm not looking forward to the
paperwork of closing out all our accounts...

France continues to be a blast and I look forward to the time that
remains. :)
