title: Covid Personal Update -- One Month In
date: 2020-04-13
Modified: 2020-11-21 15:49
Author: Wm. Minchin
Tags: covid
Category: Covid

So we're maybe a month into the semi-quarantine imposed by COVID going around.
As of yet, I don't know anyone that's come down with it, and I'm okay if it
stays that way.

I am starting to wonder how long this quarantine will last though, although I
realize this is one of those things that no one *really* knows right now. At
this point, no one really knows when the restrictions will end. "Social
distancing" and "flatten the curve" have become the buzzwords *du jour*;
basically we are encouraged that by staying home we *really are* doing our
part.

In general, having the kids home has been good. They seem to be less
emotionally drained at the end of the day compared to school/daycare. We have
sort of settled into a remote learning routine, with a couple of hours of group
video chat a week, and daily worksheet. An interesting observation is that the
kids *could* do the worksheets on the computer, but *we* (the parents) found it
unworkable because the kids hadn't figured out how to do "good enough" on the
computer yet, and would strive for perfection, even if that meant deleting all
their work and recommencing several times. For our (the parents') sanity, it
proved to be better to print the worksheets, and let them do it by hand with
pen and paper. Overall, it felt much like Summer Break had come early.

The most noticeable downside of this whole set up (the kids and my Honey home)
is that it has thrown my attempts to build a "morning routine" out the window.
Basically, there is nothing external to attach a routine to. For my sanity, it
just works better to all get up about the same time, and my bedtime is largely
dictated by when we get the kiddos in bed, and then add a little bit of
Honey-and-me time.

Thus actual timing of bedtime is thus without much in the way of an anchor in
either the morning or the evening, and instead we try to make sure everyone is
well slept rather than worrying about timelines as much. On that account, I
think we're succeeding at least.
