title: Economics of Land Redevelopment
date: 2020-08-16
Modified: 2020-11-21 16:18
Author: Wm. Minchin
Tags: covid, housing, city planning, redevelopment
Category: Covid

I've been house hunting for a while, seeing if I can mind a bigger place at an
affordable price. As part of that, I've been thinking a little about urban
renewal and redevelopment and their effect on house pricing. The long and the
short of it is that I don't see how they can bring down house prices
(directly).

We've also previously looked into real estate investing (i.e. buying a rental
house), and so I've been to perhaps more than my fair share of open houses. In
the neighbourhoods I've most been interested in (both for rentals and for my
own house), they were originally developed in the 1950's and 1960's. It's an
age where the homes were mostly built on the same basic principals as current
construction (i.e. 2x4 wood frame construction on poured concrete foundations),
but the houses are old enough to see their original owners start to move into
old folks homes. Together, it means that the houses are typically livable as is
(although sometimes dated inside) but some of them are in really rough shape,
or are very small (~800 sq ft) by modern standards, and so become attractive to
be demolished and the lots redeveloped.

But when you buy a house, it's actually a combined price of the land its
sitting on plus the standing house itself. It can be hard to tease the two
apart, but in general, it seems that these "houses" are priced based on 75% lot
value and 25% structure. To put numbers on it, houses will go for $325,000 to
$450,000 (baring exceptional houses, and those at the high end being recently
renovated/updated), while lots (sometimes with a house in poor shape that will
need to be removed, sometimes already prepped for re-development) will go for
$250,000 to $275,000. This would imply that the existing house structure is
worth $50,000 to $200,000. These houses are around 1,100 to 1,250 sq ft in
size, and based on building costs of ~$200/sq ft, that gives these houses a
rebuilding cost of $220,000 to $250,000, plus an additional $40,000 for a
double garage (which is common on many of these existing houses). The numbers
aren't actually all that important, but the point is it costs more to buy a lot
and build a new house on it than it is to just buy a standing house, sometimes
by a considerable margin. And thus, you can't just build houses to lower
housing costs in these neighbourhoods.

One not-uncommon development technique is for a developer to buy a lot, split
it in two (the City now permits houses on 25 ft wide lots, and many of the old
lots were around 50 ft wide), and build a house on each side. These new houses
are two stories tall to try and get more usable space, but even so, they seem
to max out around 1,600 sq ft (so 800 sq ft per level). But the pricing can be
high: $550,000 to $800,000 each!

So if your goal is to bring down housing costs, other options are needed. One
option would seem to be putting more units on the same land, but we just saw
how splitting the lot in two didn't seem to work. Row housing may work, but
doesn't actually provide much of a density increase over houses on 25 foot
lots. Going to apartment-style housing might work, but high rises are actually
more expensive to build to "regular" housing on a square foot basis, in part
because now you have to build underground parking for everyone. Wood frame
low-rises (up to about 4 stories) might hit the sweet spot where in makes a
difference.

We actually considered apartment-style living for a little bit, however most
everything we could find was either too small or way more expensive that a
"regular" house (or both!). Apartment-style units seemed to max out a 3
bedrooms as well. To be fair, houses with more than 3 bedrooms are not common
either, but a house (at least here) would typically have a basement that could
be developed into additional bedrooms. I have yet to see an apartment-style
unit with 1,000 sq ft of undeveloped space that you, the owner, can build out
at a later time. And for us, with the kids and working from home (which started
well before Covid), 3 bedrooms simply isn't enough long term.

So this is a rather long way of saying that redevelopment doesn't seem to lower
housing prices, and until apartment-style buildings offer 4, 5, and 6 bedroom
unit at prices lower that single family housing, apartment-style isn't going to
be a serious alternative for family housing either.

I wish I could offer a better solution.
