title: AutoLoader Plugin 1.0.2 for Pelican Released
date: 2021-10-25 20:29
tags: Pelican, Pelican Plugins, Releases, Python, Pelican Themes, Autoloader
Category: Pelican Plugins

*AutoLoader* is a plugin for [Pelican](http://docs.getpelican.com/),
a static site generator written in Python.

*AutoLoader* is a "meta plugin" in that it doesn't directly affect your Pelican
site, but rather works to make your other plugins better. By way of background,
Pelican 4.5 added the ability to autoload plugins that exist in the
`pelican.plugins` namespace. This plugin allows you to extend this autoload
ability to any arbitrary namespace. In particlar, it defaults to extending this
ability to my `minchin.pelican.plugins` namespace, and thus will autoload my
other plugins, if installed. It can also be used to add plugin autoloading to
earlier version of Pelican.
<!-- read more -->

Personally, these two abilities (to autoload my other plugins and to add
autoloading to older versions of Pelican) are significant, because I am
currently in the process of upgrading from Pelican 3.7 to the current version
(4.7) and what was holding me back was the effort to move my plugins from their
current `minchin.pelican.plugins` namespace. With *AutoLoader*, it makes it
simple to upgrade my Pelican version, regardless of whether the plugins have
(yet? ever?) moved namespaces. It also allows me to continue creating
custom/personal versions of plugins in my namespace, particularly in cases
where the original author is no longer updating their plugin.

## Installation

The simplest way to install *AutoLoader* is to use `pip`:

~~~sh
pip install minchin.pelican.plugins.autoloader
~~~

## Configuration

If you are running Pelican 4.5 or newer, and haven't manually defined `PLUGINS`
in your `pelicanconf.py` site configuration file, nothing more is needed:
*AutoLoader* will autoload itself :) Without further configuration, it will
autoload any installed plugins in the `minchin.pelican.plugins` namespace (and
Pelican itself will autoload any installed plugins in the `pelican.plugins`
namespace).

If you are using a older version of Pelican (i.e. before v4.5) and/or you have
defined `PLUGINS`, you'll need to add *AutoLoader* to your list of plugins,
like this:

~~~py
# pelicanconf.py

from minchin.pelican.plugins import autoloader

PLUGINS = [
    # others...
    autoloader,
]
~~~

If you want to add additional namespaces for *AutoLoader* to work from, define
`AUTOLOADER_NAMESPACES` (as a list or other iterable) in your `pelicanconf.py`
file. For example, if you want to autoload the `pelican.plugins` namespace
(useful if you're still using Pelican 3.7 or 4.2 or have defined `PLUGINS`, and
the configuration this site is currently using):

~~~py
# pelicanconf.py

from minchin.pelican.plugins import autoloader

AUTOLOADER_NAMESPACES = autoloader.DEFAULT_NAMESPACE_LIST + [
    "pelican.plugins",
    # other namespaces
]
~~~

## This Release

v1.0.2 is the first public release. Earlier version numbers got "eaten"
making sure the version pushed to PyPI would work as expected.

## Known Issues

- the release machinery used relies on `invoke`, which has not yet been updated
  to be compatible with Python 3.10. Beyond pushing out releases, this plugin
  should work with Python 3.10.
- plugins activated by *AutoLoader* do not show running `pelican-plugins`.
  (`pelican-plugins` was a script added by Pelican 4.5 to show namespace
  plugins currently active). *AutoLoader* however should be itself listed
  (although likely as `pelican.plugins.autoloader`).

## Forward Looking Thoughts

In my [last plugin release post]({filename}20210515-image-process-211.md), I'd
commented that there were "only 10 more plugins to go!" (i.e. to move to the
`pelican.plugins` namespace, and presumably under the
[Pelican-Plugins](https://github.com/pelican-plugins/) organization on GitHub).
This handily sidesteps those transitions from keeping me from upgrading Pelican
on my personal site! I'm feeling much closer to getting this site upgraded to
the current version of Pelican.

I plan on making releases of my other plugins shortly to rely on this and to
update the installation instructions to that end.
