content/20210705-seafoam-260.md, before:

title: Advanced Pelican: Self-Configuring Themes, and Seafoam 2.6.0 Released
date: 2021-07-05 15:58
Author: Wm. Minchin
Tags: seafoam, Python, releases
Category: Seafoam
Location: Tanner Camp

I've just released a groundbreaking version of my website theme *Seafoam*; I
believe this is the first Pelican theme designed to configure itself!

The root of this *magic* is that the theme has actually been packaged as a
namespace plugin for Pelican. If you're running a sufficiently recent version
of Pelican (i.e. v4.5 or newer), Pelican will automatically load the *Seafoam*
plugin; if you're using an older version of Pelican (or other, non-namespace
plugins), you'll need to add the *Seafoam* plugin to you configuration:

<!-- read more -->

```python
# pelicanconf.py

PLUGINS = [
    "pelican.plugins.seafoam",
    # others, as needed/desired
]

# the rest of your configuration file
```

Unless you need to change *Seafoam*'s behaviour from its defaults, you
shouldn't need do any further configuration!

## Shiny! How Do I Do This For My Theme?

### Start With a Namespace Plugin

A namespace plugin works its magic by have the code files in the right folder
(i.e. "namespace"). For Pelican, we want those code files under
`pelican/plugins`. So our file layout looks like this:

```text
<project root>
  +- pelican
  |    `- plugins
  |         `- my_theme
  |              `- __init__.py
  `- setup.py
```

Of particular note is that both the `pelican` and `plugins` directories have
no Python code directly in them.

### Add Your Theme Files

For this article, I'm going to treat the actual creation of a theme as
out-of-scope and assume you already have a theme. Your theme will consist of a
`templates` folder, containing the Jinja2[^jinja2] templates with `.html` file
extensions, and possibly a `static` folder containing the theme's static assets
(images, CSS, and JavaScript). Add these as a subfolder of your theme. So now
our file layout looks like this (actual static files not shown):

```text
<project root>
  +- pelican
  |    `- plugins
  |         `- my_theme
  |              + static
  |              |   +- css
  |              |   +- js
  |              |   `- images
  |              +- templates
  |              |    +- index.html
  |              |    `- <other templates> 
  |              `- __init__.py
  `- setup.py
```

### Find Our Templates

Next, we're going to add a function to our theme's `__init__.py` file that will
point to the location of our theme:

```python
# pelican/plugins/my_theme/__init__.py

from pathlib import Path

def get_path():
    # Theme directory is defined as our parent directory
    return str(Path(__file__).resolve().parent)
```

If we didn't do anything more, in our `pelicanconf.py`, we could:

```python
# pelicanconf.py
from pelican.plugins import my_theme

THEME = my_theme.get_path()
```

(And this is exactly how *Seafoam* worked previously.)

### Automatically Activate Our Theme

Now we get into the real *magic*, to which there are two parts: 1) a function
to set the theme, and 2) hook that function into Pelican's signals.

The function to set the theme is rather simple, but note that we set
`pelican_obj.theme` directly rather than `pelican_obj.settings["THEME"]`, as
this setting appears to already have been read.

```python
# pelican/plugins/my_theme/__init__.py

def set_theme(pelican_obj):
    pelican_obj.theme = get_path()
```

If we wanted to, we could extend the above function to massage Pelican's
settings (this is where *Seafoam* sets its defaults).

For signals, these are "hooks" that allow you to run custom code as Pelican
goes through the process of generating your site. We're going to hook into the
very first signal that Pelican offers:

```python
# pelican/plugins/my_theme/__init__.py

from pelican import signals

def register():
    signals.initialized.connect(set_theme)
```

### Complete Python Code

Adding a couple of niceties (logging, a version number) and above, we end up
with something like this:

```python
# pelican/plugins/my_theme/__init__.py

import logging
from pathlib import Path

from pelican import signals

__version__ = "1.0.0"

logger = logging.get_logger(__name__)

def get_path():
    return str(Path(__file__).resolve().parent)

def set_theme(pelican_obj):
    pelican_obj.theme = get_path()
    logger.debug("[My Theme] Theme set!")

def register():
    signals.initialized.connect(set_theme)
```

### Tips for Publishing

When I went to publish the updated package to PyPI, I found I had to switch
from `setuptools.find_packages()` to `setuptools.find_namespace_packages()` in
my theme's `setup.py`. I also had to add the non-Python files to my
`MANIFEST.in` file:

```in
# MANIFEST.in

recursive-include pelican/plugins/seafoam/static *.*
recursive-include pelican/plugins/seafoam/templates *.*
```

Finally, be sure to include the `Framework :: Pelican :: Themes` PyPI
classifier so others can find your work!

If I missed something in this mini-tutorial, but sure to leave a comment or
send me an email so I can expand/fix it.

## Upgrading

Upgrading *should* is straight forward; I haven't broken anything on purpose
since v2.0.0 came out. With this release several previously mandatory settings
are now optional to specify and so you can remove them if you want, but keeping
them in place shouldn't cause any problems.

To install or to upgrade, you can use pip:

```sh
pip install seafoam --upgrade
```

If you're already running Pelican v4.5 (or newer) **and** only using namespace
plugins, then the required plugins will automatically load. However, most will
have to update your `pelicanconf.py` to point to the new plugin names:

```python
# pelicanconf.py

PLUGINS = [
    "pelican.plugins.seafoam",
    "pelican.plugins.jinja_filters",  # <-- optional now
    "pelican.plugins.image_process",  # <-- optional now
    # others, as desired...
]
```

All other settings, if it was just to apply the default settings for *Seafoam*,
can now be removed.

To be clear, *Seafoam* still supports Pelican 3 (i.e. you don't need to upgrade
to Pelican 4.5 quite yet).

## Development Issues {#development-issues}

This is just a section where I make some notes on the issues I ran into while
working on the code.

PEP517 & PEP518 are accepted extensions to Python dealing with the ability to
specify a "build backend", i.e. how does a given module package itself up for
distribution. The way to do this is to add a few lines to your `pyproject.toml`
file (the new place to collect settings and metadata about your Python project)
like so:

```toml
# pyproject.toml

[build-system]
requires = ["setuptools >= 40.6.0", "wheel"]
```

I figured I would do this to this latest version of *Seafoam* as this is *the
way of the future* there really wasn't any obvious downside. However, I
discovered a downside: when you go to build such a package from source, it
wants to create a isolated environment for doing so, and as part of that, it
wants to download *setuptools* and *wheel* (really, whatever you specify in the
`build-system` key) and doesn't seem to rely on either the system libraries or
the system's *pip* download cache. Normally, this wouldn't be an issue, but if
you try and install such a package from the Test PyPI server, it also tries to
download and install the build requirements from there too! And many packages,
including *setuptools* are never posted to the Test PyPI server.

There may be a workaround, but I have somewhat limited internet at the moment
so I haven't been able to research the issue. I should probably raise an issue,
somewhere....

**Summary**: Source distributions with a PEP517/518 *setuptools* build system
are unable to be installed from the Test PyPI server.

## Future Plans {#future-plans}

This release actually resolves mosts of the [future
plans]({filename}20210515-seafoam-250.md#future-plans) I'd written for
the v2.5 release. At this point, further development will likely be tied to my
website demands directly.

One thing I thought about doing was to make the tag pages (called "labels" on
this site) more powerful by adding the ability to add a custom text header to
them. For example, the current "homepage" link for *Seafoam* is given as such a
tag page (<http://blog.minchin.ca/label/seafoam/>) and this would be handy to
do for all my Python projects, as most of the project history is already
collected here as blog posts. I haven't begun to look at this, so I'm not sure
if it could be done from the Jinja templates alone, or if it would require
adjusting the Pelican output with an extention, either as part of *Seafoam* or
a separate plugin.

Also, as I [wrote
previously]({filename}20200717-seafoam-245-released.md#future-plans), there are
long term plans to upgrade to Bootstrap 5, but nothing started there.

## Changelog {#changelog}

See my [previous post]({filename}20210515-seafoam-250.md#changelog) for
earlier changelog entries.

### Version 2.6.0 -- July 5, 2021

- *feature* add internal plugin. This will allow the theme to automatically
  configure and activate itself. Should significantly reduced installation
  complexity. You may be able to completely remove the configuration you have
  in place for the plugin.
- *feature* include *Seafoam* version in source HTML of generated sites
- *bug* adjust HTML to add the ``.table`` class where needed, rather
  than applying the formatting to all HTML tables. Effectively a re-work of
  v.2.4.7.
- *support* add screenshots. See issues #1 and #18.
- *support* updated `setup.py`. Include tempalate and static files at new
  location.
- *support* no longer include raw LESS files in distributions or in
  generated sites.
- *support* now also requires `beautifulsoup4` and `semantic_version`

[^jinja2]: Jinja version 3 has now been released, so what does this package go
by now? *Jinja3*? *Jinja2 v3*? plain old *Jinja*? In any case, `jinja2` seems
to install version 3 off of PyPI.

Commit message:

[post update] Seafoam 2.6.0 released: allow pip installs from test server

content/20210705-seafoam-260.md, after:

title: Advanced Pelican: Self-Configuring Themes, and Seafoam 2.6.0 Released
date: 2021-07-05 15:58
Modified: 2021-07-07 10:49
Author: Wm. Minchin
Tags: seafoam, Python, releases
Category: Seafoam
Location: Tanner Camp

I've just released a groundbreaking version of my website theme *Seafoam*; I
believe this is the first Pelican theme designed to configure itself!

The root of this *magic* is that the theme has actually been packaged as a
namespace plugin for Pelican. If you're running a sufficiently recent version
of Pelican (i.e. v4.5 or newer), Pelican will automatically load the *Seafoam*
plugin; if you're using an older version of Pelican (or other, non-namespace
plugins), you'll need to add the *Seafoam* plugin to you configuration:

<!-- read more -->

```python
# pelicanconf.py

PLUGINS = [
    "pelican.plugins.seafoam",
    # others, as needed/desired
]

# the rest of your configuration file
```

Unless you need to change *Seafoam*'s behaviour from its defaults, you
shouldn't need do any further configuration!

## Shiny! How Do I Do This For My Theme?

### Start With a Namespace Plugin

A namespace plugin works its magic by have the code files in the right folder
(i.e. "namespace"). For Pelican, we want those code files under
`pelican/plugins`. So our file layout looks like this:

```text
<project root>
  +- pelican
  |    `- plugins
  |         `- my_theme
  |              `- __init__.py
  `- setup.py
```

Of particular note is that both the `pelican` and `plugins` directories have
no Python code directly in them.

### Add Your Theme Files

For this article, I'm going to treat the actual creation of a theme as
out-of-scope and assume you already have a theme. Your theme will consist of a
`templates` folder, containing the Jinja2[^jinja2] templates with `.html` file
extensions, and possibly a `static` folder containing the theme's static assets
(images, CSS, and JavaScript). Add these as a subfolder of your theme. So now
our file layout looks like this (actual static files not shown):

```text
<project root>
  +- pelican
  |    `- plugins
  |         `- my_theme
  |              + static
  |              |   +- css
  |              |   +- js
  |              |   `- images
  |              +- templates
  |              |    +- index.html
  |              |    `- <other templates> 
  |              `- __init__.py
  `- setup.py
```

### Find Our Templates

Next, we're going to add a function to our theme's `__init__.py` file that will
point to the location of our theme:

```python
# pelican/plugins/my_theme/__init__.py

from pathlib import Path

def get_path():
    # Theme directory is defined as our parent directory
    return str(Path(__file__).resolve().parent)
```

If we didn't do anything more, in our `pelicanconf.py`, we could:

```python
# pelicanconf.py
from pelican.plugins import my_theme

THEME = my_theme.get_path()
```

(And this is exactly how *Seafoam* worked previously.)

### Automatically Activate Our Theme

Now we get into the real *magic*, to which there are two parts: 1) a function
to set the theme, and 2) hook that function into Pelican's signals.

The function to set the theme is rather simple, but note that we set
`pelican_obj.theme` directly rather than `pelican_obj.settings["THEME"]`, as
this setting appears to already have been read.

```python
# pelican/plugins/my_theme/__init__.py

def set_theme(pelican_obj):
    pelican_obj.theme = get_path()
```

If we wanted to, we could extend the above function to massage Pelican's
settings (this is where *Seafoam* sets its defaults).

For signals, these are "hooks" that allow you to run custom code as Pelican
goes through the process of generating your site. We're going to hook into the
very first signal that Pelican offers:

```python
# pelican/plugins/my_theme/__init__.py

from pelican import signals

def register():
    signals.initialized.connect(set_theme)
```

### Complete Python Code

Adding a couple of niceties (logging, a version number) and above, we end up
with something like this:

```python
# pelican/plugins/my_theme/__init__.py

import logging
from pathlib import Path

from pelican import signals

__version__ = "1.0.0"

logger = logging.get_logger(__name__)

def get_path():
    return str(Path(__file__).resolve().parent)

def set_theme(pelican_obj):
    pelican_obj.theme = get_path()
    logger.debug("[My Theme] Theme set!")

def register():
    signals.initialized.connect(set_theme)
```

### Tips for Publishing

When I went to publish the updated package to PyPI, I found I had to switch
from `setuptools.find_packages()` to `setuptools.find_namespace_packages()` in
my theme's `setup.py`. I also had to add the non-Python files to my
`MANIFEST.in` file:

```in
# MANIFEST.in

recursive-include pelican/plugins/seafoam/static *.*
recursive-include pelican/plugins/seafoam/templates *.*
```

Finally, be sure to include the `Framework :: Pelican :: Themes` PyPI
classifier so others can find your work!

If I missed something in this mini-tutorial, but sure to leave a comment or
send me an email so I can expand/fix it.

## Upgrading

Upgrading *should* is straight forward; I haven't broken anything on purpose
since v2.0.0 came out. With this release several previously mandatory settings
are now optional to specify and so you can remove them if you want, but keeping
them in place shouldn't cause any problems.

To install or to upgrade, you can use pip:

```sh
pip install seafoam --upgrade
```

If you're already running Pelican v4.5 (or newer) **and** only using namespace
plugins, then the required plugins will automatically load. However, most will
have to update your `pelicanconf.py` to point to the new plugin names:

```python
# pelicanconf.py

PLUGINS = [
    "pelican.plugins.seafoam",
    "pelican.plugins.jinja_filters",  # <-- optional now
    "pelican.plugins.image_process",  # <-- optional now
    # others, as desired...
]
```

All other settings, if it was just to apply the default settings for *Seafoam*,
can now be removed.

To be clear, *Seafoam* still supports Pelican 3 (i.e. you don't need to upgrade
to Pelican 4.5 quite yet).

## Development Issues {#development-issues}

This is just a section where I make some notes on the issues I ran into while
working on the code.

PEP517 & PEP518 are accepted extensions to Python dealing with the ability to
specify a "build backend", i.e. how does a given module package itself up for
distribution. The way to do this is to add a few lines to your `pyproject.toml`
file (the new place to collect settings and metadata about your Python project)
like so:

```toml
# pyproject.toml

[build-system]
requires = ["setuptools >= 40.6.0", "wheel"]
build-backend = "setuptools.build_meta"
```

I figured I would do this to this latest version of *Seafoam* as this is *the
way of the future* there really wasn't any obvious downside. However, I
discovered a downside: when you go to build such a package from source, it
wants to create a isolated environment for doing so, and as part of that, it
wants to download *setuptools* and *wheel* (really, whatever you specify in the
`build-system` key) and doesn't seem to rely on either the system libraries or
the system's *pip* download cache. Normally, this wouldn't be an issue, but if
you try and install such a package from the Test PyPI server, it also tries to
download and install the build requirements from there too! And many packages,
including *setuptools* are never posted to the Test PyPI server.

There may be a workaround, but I have somewhat limited internet at the moment
so I haven't been able to research the issue. I should probably raise an issue,
somewhere....

**Summary**: Source distributions with a PEP517/518 *setuptools* build system
are unable to be installed from the Test PyPI server.

**Update (July 7th)**: The answer is to call *pip* with `--no-build-isolation`.
This relies on the environment being installed into to provide the needed
packages to actually do the install, and as a byproduct allows offline installs
and installs when the "main" package is hosted on the Test PyPI server.

See this [Stack Overflow answer](https://stackoverflow.com/a/67595330/4276230),
which points to the *terse to the point of being cryptic* [pip
documentation](https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/cli/pip_install/#cmdoption-no-build-isolation).

## Future Plans {#future-plans}

This release actually resolves mosts of the [future
plans]({filename}20210515-seafoam-250.md#future-plans) I'd written for
the v2.5 release. At this point, further development will likely be tied to my
website demands directly.

One thing I thought about doing was to make the tag pages (called "labels" on
this site) more powerful by adding the ability to add a custom text header to
them. For example, the current "homepage" link for *Seafoam* is given as such a
tag page (<http://blog.minchin.ca/label/seafoam/>) and this would be handy to
do for all my Python projects, as most of the project history is already
collected here as blog posts. I haven't begun to look at this, so I'm not sure
if it could be done from the Jinja templates alone, or if it would require
adjusting the Pelican output with an extention, either as part of *Seafoam* or
a separate plugin.

Also, as I [wrote
previously]({filename}20200717-seafoam-245-released.md#future-plans), there are
long term plans to upgrade to Bootstrap 5, but nothing started there.

## Changelog {#changelog}

See my [previous post]({filename}20210515-seafoam-250.md#changelog) for
earlier changelog entries.

### Version 2.6.0 -- July 5, 2021

- *feature* add internal plugin. This will allow the theme to automatically
  configure and activate itself. Should significantly reduced installation
  complexity. You may be able to completely remove the configuration you have
  in place for the plugin.
- *feature* include *Seafoam* version in source HTML of generated sites
- *bug* adjust HTML to add the ``.table`` class where needed, rather
  than applying the formatting to all HTML tables. Effectively a re-work of
  v.2.4.7.
- *support* add screenshots. See issues #1 and #18.
- *support* updated `setup.py`. Include tempalate and static files at new
  location.
- *support* no longer include raw LESS files in distributions or in
  generated sites.
- *support* now also requires `beautifulsoup4` and `semantic_version`

[^jinja2]: Jinja version 3 has now been released, so what does this package go
by now? *Jinja3*? *Jinja2 v3*? plain old *Jinja*? In any case, `jinja2` seems
to install version 3 off of PyPI.
