title: Covid Vaccine -- 1 of 2
date: 2021-05-11 21:37
Author: Wm. Minchin
Tags: Covid
Category: Covid

So, on Saturday, I ended up getting my first COVID vaccine shot.

I actually ended up driving an hour out of town for it. Last Thursday I became
eligible to sign up, but I was kind of stumped for when to book because our
second car was in the shop. Normally (or what passes as "normal" in these Covid
times...), that wouldn't really be an issue what with working from home these
days, but I need a car to get to the vaccination site if I did it during the
workday. On Friday, when I went to book and as luck would have it, there was
one opening about an hour out of town that I could do the very next day; it was
the only opening in the next week! So I jumped on it.

The drive out ended up being in the rain. It's kind of ridiculous to have to
drive an hour, but on the other hand, it's done and it didn't hurt to get out
of the house.

I got the Pfizer shot (although the appointment was selected based entirely on
when it was). As for side effects, they've been pretty minimal: I had a sore
shoulder (where I was given the injection) for a couple of days. It was a weird
sort of not-quite "bruise": it was felt tender to the touch, but it didn't
really limit my movement the same ways a normal bruise often does. I have been
told that the follow up short is worse, but we'll deal with that when it
happens.

For follow up, they say our second shot will be available in about 16 weeks,
which seems an incredibly long time. On one hand, with vaccines going out, and
more and more people being vaccinated, things should start opening up,
hopefully because the Covid case count should start falling. But 16
weeks...that's four months -- May, June, July, August -- we'll almost be done
the summer by the time that comes. And there still isn't a shot approved for
the young ones yet, for the kids under 12. Will this ever really go away until
something is approved for the kids? I don't know. For now, in-person schooling
has been cancelled ("for the next two weeks") to try and keep the case count
down.

Overall, I'll take this bit of hope. Hopefully, more reasons to hope follow
soon!
