title: Seafoam 2.5.0 Released
date: 2021-05-15 15:24
Author: Wm. Minchin
Tags: Seafoam, Python, Releases
Category: Seafoam

It's time for a new update to *Seafoam*, the website theme currently in use
here (on my Blog) and by my wider site.

The biggest change this update brings is the addition of *period archive* (i.e.
daily, month, and yearly) archive pages. I'm actually not sure why they weren't
include previously, although it is possible that the feature (in Pelican) didn't
yet exist at the time this theme was first created.

This update also moves from my namespace plugins to the same plugins maintained
by the larger Pelican community (see upgrading for configuration changes
required on your side).

## Upgrading

Upgrading *should* is straight forward. I haven't broken anything on purpose
since v2.0.0 came out.

To install or to upgrade, you can use pip:

```sh
pip install seafoam --upgrade
```

If you're already running Pelican v4.5 (or newer) **and** only using namespace
plugins, then the required plugins will automatically load. However, most will
have to update your `pelicanconf.py` to point to the new plugin names:

```python
# pelicanconf.py

PLUGINS = [
    # 'minchin.pelican.jinja_filters',  # <-- remove this line
    # 'minchin.pelican.plugins.image_process',  # <-- remove this line
    'pelican.plugins.jinja_filters',
    'pelican.plugins.image_process',
    # others, as desired...
]
```

To be clear, *Seafoam* still supports Pelican 3 (i.e. you don't need to upgrade
to Pelican 4.5 quite yet) and the latest versions of the two required plugins
support back to Pelican 3 as well.

## Future Plans {#future-plans}

I've been working a bunch of late to update the plugins used by this blog, and
it got me thinking that perhaps I could/should write a plugin to complement the
theme. At a very basic level, it could used to feed the theme version into the
global (Pelican) configuration so it could be included in the footer. But
expanding on that idea, it could semi-automatically ensure that your Pelican
site is configured as needed (plugins included, *image process* configured,
theme selected) to speed up first setting up your site. The other place that it
could be interesting is to use it for certain formatting pieces; for example,
v2.4.7 was released to fix table formatting, but it did that by applying
Bootstrap's table formatting rules to *all* tables on the site, whereas a plugin
could apply the right HTML class to only those tables within the body of
articles (so if you use tables for formatting somewhere, it won't blow up your
site). Nothing has been started yet, but I'm excited by the possibilities.

Also, as I [wrote
previously]({filename}20200717-seafoam-245-released.md#future-plans), this theme
is based on Bootstrap 3, and I'd figured I'd skip Bootstrap 4 and go straight to
Bootstrap 5. Bootstrap 5 is still in alpha testing, and I haven't done anything
on this since last time, so this is likely a long way out.

## Changelog {#changelog}

See my [previous post]({filename}20200717-seafoam-245-released.md#changelog) for
earlier changelog entries.

### Version 2.4.7 -- April 17, 2021

- *bug* apply table formatting without requiring the `.table` class (as is
  normally required by Bootstrap)

### Version 2.5.0 -- May 15, 2021

- *feature*: add stylized period archive pages
- *bug*: fix 404 page layout issues and typos
- *support*: upgrades from *minchin.pelican.jinja-filters* to
  *pelican-jinja-filters* (It's the same plugin, just under a new name on
  PyPI and packaged as a namespace plugin for Pelican 4.5 or newer.)
- *support*: upgrades from *minchin.pelican.plugins.image-process* to
  *pelican-image-process* (It's the same plugin, just under a new name on
  PyPI and packaged as a namespace plugin for Pelican 4.5 or newer.)
