title: Upgrating a Python Package After 5 Years, and Colourettu 2.1.1. Released
date: 2021-10-06 14:46
Author: Wm. Minchin
Tags: colourettu, Python, releases, GitHub, Hackoberfest
Category: Colourettu

So over the weekend as a Hackoberfest project, I decided to update a project
that hadn't been touched in five years.

That project is [Colourettu](http://minchin.ca/colourettu/), I library I wrote
several years back to do some basic colour theme management. The last release
was [version 2.0.0]({filename}20161128-colourettu-2-released.md), released in
November 2016, basically five years ago. If feels a little bit like cheating to
work on my own project for Hackoberfest, but it is officially allowed and the
project could use a little love, and it is Open Source. So I don't feel too bad
about it.

Five years ago, Python 3.5 was the most recent Python version out, and the
project had recently dropped official 2.6 support, but was still officially
supporting Python 2.7. Today, the oldest version of Python supported is 3.6,
and version 3.10 just came out a few days ago. Also, I'm not longer worried
about supporting Python 2.

But even having gone through that many Python updates, I actually didn't need
to make ***any*** changes to actual code base. Most of the changes I needed to do
were actually related to the support services around the project. The most
significant was the switch from Travis-CI to GitHub Actions for automated
testing. Five years ago, Travis was basically the best and only way to do
automated testing on pull requests; today it's faded away. Although it was
still technically online today, I couldn't figure out how to get Travis to work
at all. And without an obvious free option with Travis, it seemed like a good
time to move to GitHub Actions. Setting up GitHub Actions proved rather
straightforward, with the only missing piece being how to mark a particular
case as an "allowed failure" (readers, any suggestions?).

There were a couple of other random updates: a couple of private forks for
packages used by the documentation site had to be updated to provide PEP-440
compatible version numbers. I also had to adjust the format of math formulas in
the documentation to make Sphinx 4 happy. I also updated the release script; I
was running an earlier version of [minchin.releaser][minchin.releaser] that I've since updated
and packaged. The most changes were due to *black-ify-ing* the codebase.

So I was happily surprised at how well this "old" Python code ran; hopefully
the next five years will prove as boring!

## Changelog {#changelog}

See my [previous post]({filename}20161128-colourettu-2-released.md) for
earlier changelog entries.

### Version 2.1.1 -- October 5, 2021

- *bug* Documentation: fix formula rendering for Sphinx 4.2

### Version 2.1.0  -- October 5, 2021

- *feature* [Pull Request 148][Pull Request 148] various updates to ensure that
  the package is still installable (and hackable) on current versions of Python
- *bug* [Pull Request 148][Pull Request 148] proofread documentation
- *support* [Issue 7][Issue 7] upgrade to [minchin.releaser][minchin.releaser] package.
  Colourettu was previously using an early vendorized version of this.
- *support* [Pull Request 147][Pull Request 147] update minimum versions of
  several dependencies to remove support for version with known security
  issues.
- *support* [Pull Request 148][Pull Request 148] drop official support for
  Python < 3.6, including dropping support for Python 2. I haven't changed
  anything in the codebase that I expect will break these earlier versions, but
  I'm no longer testing against them.
- *support* [Pull Request 148][Pull Request 148] switch to personal fork of
  [PSphinxTheme][PSphinxTheme] and [lconf lexer][lconf lexer] (i.e. basically
  the documentation theme) as to provide versions that can be installed with
  current versions of *pip*. Specifically, these private version provide
  PEP440-style version numbers.
- *support* [Pull Request 148][Pull Request 148] black-ify codebase
- *support* [Pull Request 148][Pull Request 148] update *isort* to v5
- *support* [Pull Request 149][Pull Request 149] swap from Travis-CI to GitHub
  Actions for Continuous Integration

[minchin.releaser]: https://github.com/MinchinWeb/minchin.releaser "Minchin dot Releaser"
[PSphinxTheme]: https://github.com/MinchinWeb/PSphinxTheme/tree/colourettu
[lconf lexer]: https://github.com/MinchinWeb/python_lconf_lexer/tree/colourettu
[Issue 7]: https://github.com/MinchinWeb/colourettu/issues/7
[Pull Request 147]: https://github.com/MinchinWeb/colourettu/pull/147
[Pull Request 148]: https://github.com/MinchinWeb/colourettu/pull/148
[Pull Request 149]: https://github.com/MinchinWeb/colourettu/pull/149
