title: AutoLoader Plugin 1.1.0 for Pelican Released
date: 2022-04-09 11:14
Modified: 2022-04-10 19:56
tags: Pelican, Pelican Plugins, Releases, Python, Pelican Themes, Autoloader
Category: Pelican Plugins

*AutoLoader* is a plugin for [Pelican](http://docs.getpelican.com/),
a static site generator written in Python.

*AutoLoader* is a "meta plugin" in that it doesn't directly affect your Pelican
site, but rather works to make your other plugins better. By way of background,
Pelican 4.5 added the ability to autoload plugins that exist in the
`pelican.plugins` namespace. This plugin allows you to extend this autoload
ability to any arbitrary namespace. In particlar, it defaults to extending this
ability to my `minchin.pelican.plugins` namespace, and thus will autoload my
other plugins, if installed. It can also be used to add plugin autoloading to
earlier version of Pelican.
<!-- read more -->

## This Release

This release adds the ability to disable auto-loading of specific plugins. In
particular, it defaults to no longer trying to load `pelican.plugins.signals`
and `pelican.plugins._utils` which are modules within the `pelican.plugins`
namespace, but are not actually plugins.

## Upgrading

The simplest way to upgrade (or install) *AutoLoader* is to use `pip`:

~~~sh
pip install minchin.pelican.plugins.autoloader --upgrade
~~~

No configuration changes are needed.

If you want to use these new features, define `AUTOLOADER_PLUGIN_BLACKLIST` in
your `pelicanconf.py`:

~~~python
# pelicanconf.py

from minchin.pelican.plugins import autoloader

AUTOLOADER_PLUGIN_BLACKLIST = autoloader.DEFAULT_PLUGIN_BLACKLIST + [
    "pelican.plugins.misbehaving_plugin",
    # other plugins
]
~~~

## Known Issues

- the release machinery used relies on `invoke`, but an update has been pushed
  with now supports Python 3.10.
- plugins activated by *AutoLoader* do not show running `pelican-plugins`.
  (`pelican-plugins` was a script added by Pelican 4.5 to show namespace
  plugins currently active). *AutoLoader* however should be itself listed
  (although likely as `pelican.plugins.autoloader`).
