Title: The West Still Wants In
Date: 2008-12-08 06:06
Author: Minchin Web (noreply@blogger.com)
Tags: Alberta, Canadian Politics, Coalition
Slug: the-west-still-wants-in

Fifteen years ago, a grassroots political movement with the slogan “The
West wants in” suddenly appeared within the House of Commons. Sick of
feeling that the politics of this country (Canada) were run by backroom
deals among the ‘king-makers’ in Ontario and Quebec, often to the
determent of Western Canada, the people formed a political party and
sent them to Ottawa. But even winning 80% of the seats in Alberta and
British Columbia wasn’t enough to grant the party Official Opposition
status; no, that honour went to a party who’s *raison d’être* was best
summed up by de Gaulle in 1967 when he proclaimed *“Vive le Québec
libre!”* (Long live free Quebec!)

Fast forward to today and you’ll find both political parties still on
the stage today – the Reform party has changed names and sought to
include Canadians from across the country, was elected to seats in nine
provinces this last election, and formed the government and the Bloc
Québécois remains a force in la belle province, mission unchanged.

Yesterday I gathered with colleagues and we asked “What has changed in
15 years?” The Liberals, NDP, and Bloc had just signed a deal to form
and support a coalition government and toss out the Conservative
minority elected just six weeks previous. Is this democratic? Legal?
Regardless, it doesn’t pass the smell test. And it seems that once
again, the power deals are being made in backrooms among those from
Ontario and Quebec, and the West wonders how it can influence the events
unfolding half a continent away.

In case you wonder why Albertans would approach this proposed coalition
with such concern, consider how the three parties approached the
province during this last election: **The Bloc** ignored Alberta. Jack
Layton, leader of **the NDP**, made a campaign stop Fort Smith, NWT to
do a “fly-by smear” as the Calgary Herald put it, of the Alberta
Oilsands, and proposed to shut down the whole area which directly
generates 3.5% of the Canadian GDP. As for **the Liberals**, I was there
at the University of Alberta when Stephan Dion spoke on the eve of the
election call to a group that seemed to be an even mix of white-haired
ivory tower types and curious students. I listened to him talk of *the
Green Shift*, which seemed to be simply a tax on oil production to fund
new social programs, or translated, taking money out of economic engine
in Alberta and giving it to those out of work in Ontario and Quebec.
When the other two “national” political parties seem to show up in
Alberta only to take pot shots at it to win votes elsewhere, it’s no
wonder Albertan voted 2.5:1 for the Conservatives.

Albertans want to be part of Canada, but they want to have a place at
the table. Many Albertans feel like Confederation is a party they’re
paying for but haven’t yet been invited to. While I’m old enough to
remember the 1993 election, I’m too young to have been around for the
[National Energy
Program](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/National_Energy_Program#Impact_in_Western_Canada)
(NEP), which came into effect in 1980, its memory hangs heavy in the
air.

You look around, and while the United States and Europe have fallen into
a recession, Canada’s economy stands to grow at 0.3% with Alberta
leading the way, probably in the G-20, at 1.2%. Alberta has done much to
improve its financial position of the last few years, including paying
off its debt, and today the wisdom of this approach can be seen. The
fear here is that “bailout” or “economic stimulus” money will not make
it to Alberta, but will still burden us for a generation with debt.
History tells us that the Liberals thought nothing of removing \$80-100
billion from the Alberta economy through the NEP, which, with “Alberta’s
lost decade”, is a nightmare sits in the back of the minds of many. What
will be the price we pay this time around?

And so Mr. Dion, Mr. Layton, and friends, I ask you not to mortgage my
future to pay for your political ambitions, and to treat Alberta with
the respect it deserves; we’re getting tired of being taken for a ride.
So, the ball is in your court, and all eyes are upon you. For now, the
chant remains “The West wants in...”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

My friend Kyle also posted his thoughts on the matter: [Come Together
Right Now Over
Greed](http://pedersonopinion.blogspot.com/2008/12/come-together-right-now-over-greed.html)

